once around Piaz's flying star.
So there's a star located in the
constellation of Signis, the Swan, very
visible in the summer. Uh certainly from
where I am,
61 Signi, Piaz's flying star. A very
good target actually with binoculars.
You can find it. It's relatively bright
and will show something rather
interesting. Now, it's located inside
the little red circle there on the star
map, but not shown on very many ancient
star maps because it really isn't very
bright at all. But what's interesting
about it is that it is a binary star, a
pair of K-type dwarf stars, and they
each have a magnitude on the bounds of
visibility depending on how good your
skies are, 5.2 and 6.05, so just about
visible. Um, but of course the combined
light brings them up a little bit. Uh,
and you see them with the naked eye, of
course, as a single star. They orbit
around each other in 659 years. So
that's quite a wide orbit. Now what
attracted people's attention to this in
the first place was the discovery by
Jeppi Piazi in 1792
that the star was moving from year to
year in its position across the sky. And
we've got a little zoomedin animation of
in fact the pair of stars visible as a a
binary here progressing against the
background of stars. The so-called
proper motion. What Piazi did was
compared the position he saw with the
position from earlier records spanning a
period of 40 years, giving him a long
enough baseline to be sure that he could
uh prove that the stars had moved. Um
but it took him a long time before he
was confident enough another 12 years in
fact before he uh published the value
for the mo motion rather than just
saying he thought it had changed and
showed that his observations were uh
real and he gave it the name the flying
star hence Piaz's flying star. Now, you
may remember Piazi was also the guy that
discovered the asteroid series, uh the
first uh asteroid belt object, now a
dwarf planet. Um, and that's really what
people tend to remember him for. But,
uh, I think this is one of his, uh,
great discoveries as well.
So, here's another animation closer in
showing the change in position of the
two stars against the background. And
that really when you see that the
position is changing it's either because
the star is going very rapidly or
because it's very nearby and therefore
the parallax gives you uh this
impression of speed. So, Bezi realized
that this would be well worth the
attempt of astronomers measuring the
distance using the parallax method,
using the Earth's orbit as our baseline
for a piece of trigonometry, making a
long thin triangle to the position of
the star over the period of
a full orbit. 1 year you get a 2 AU long
two astronomical units 2 * 150 million
km so 300 uh for your triangle and he
was able to show that uh it was about
11.4 light years away well um in 1838
Bessel came along and said actually it's
a little bit closer 10.4 four light
years. So definitely in the sun's
neighborhood and because he was the
first one to get a very good reference
for the distance. It's sometimes called
Bessel's star as well.
So the two components widely separated
28 arcseconds so easily separable with
amateur level equipment and uh the orbit
goes around 659 years as I said in a
rather elliptical pattern uh from 44 to
124 astronomical units.
But for a long time it was really
unknown if these were a just a couple of
stars passing by each other at this
rather large distance as many times
larger than the orbit of Neptune of
course uh or whether it was a
gravitationally bound system but we now
know that it is. So this is definitely a
pair of stars roughly equal in size
actually and orbiting around their
common center of mass.
So the two stars themselves, they're
older than the sun at about six billion
years. That in itself is in an
interesting point from the perspective
of looking for uh highly evolved systems
with uh planets and uh if you had some
habitable planets here, they would have
had a billion and a half years of head
start on the uh earth and that would be
interesting in its own right. So the two
stars well the A star 70% the mass of
the sun and the B star slightly smaller
at 63 both in that 60 to 90% of the
sun's mass that gives you a kype orange
dwarf star and these orange dwarf stars
are very very interesting because of
their very long lifetimes. So that 6
billion years is really nothing. These
guys are going to live maybe getting on
to 100 billion years in total. So very
long stable star systems. And that's a
perfect place to really uh base your
civilization if you happen to have one.
Temperatures well in the 4,000s. 4,398
and 4175 Kelvin. Classic orange dwarf
stars.
Now, it was reported by Benjamin Boss in
1911 that the uh 61 Signi Piaz flying
star is part of a group of 26 stars all
with a fairly common path around the
galaxy. All suggesting that these were
formed together in some uh ancient star
cluster and they're beginning to break
up. We've got 26 of them all together.
some of the prominent members beta
Columbi Pi Mensai 14 Tory 68 Vinis um so
nothing that we've ever heard of really
but nevertheless bright enough to track
down and doing roughly the same speed
110 km/ second relative to the sun but
there's a bit bit of a spread there it's
actually from 104 to 115
and so they're gradually going to
disperse um perturbation s and
interactions with other stellar systems
and gas clouds are going to pull them
off course and break them up um as time
goes on. But it's interesting that
they're still together after about 6
billion years.
So 61 signi planets.
Well, this has been a popular sport for
many years of claiming to find planets
and it goes all the way back to 1942
with Stan and Peter Vanderamp who
claimed to have tracked the motion
of the star against the background, the
so-called astrometry method and spotted
a perturbation in the path which they
claimed had a period of 4.8 years.
suggesting a 16 m uh 16 Jupiter mass
planet orbiting at 2.4 astronomical
units giving that pertubation. Now, as
has been happened a number of times with
such claims, it's really the
experimental error that's dominating
here and that such a planet did not
exist.
About 35 years later, Soviet astronomers
claimed the existence of three planets,
and that's not being confirmed either.
And bringing it up to date, GIA in 2018
spotted significant anomalies, quote
unquote, in the path, suggesting some
possible planets around the B star. But
we're still not there yet. We're still
not actually able to show one way or the
other whether there are planets orbiting
these uh pair of K-type orange dwarf
stars. And this puts it as a tier one
target for NASA investigations looking
for Earthlike planets.
Now, Earthlike planets, planets of
similar mass to the Earth, it would be
excellent if they were within the
habitable zone, and that exists around
each of the two stars separately. Um,
roughly the same. They're about the same
mass. The A star is a little bit more
massive and a little bit brighter. So,
the habitable zone is from 26 to 58 of
an AU and slightly closer for the B
star, but not very much. And so it'd be
fascinating to find some planets
orbiting around Piaz's flying star. And
with that, I'll bring this short video
to an end. I hope you've get the chance
to go out and have a look and see if you
can locate this interesting binary star
system. Thanks very much. Bye now.